<title>
  {{ Choice Engine: Chaos }}
</title>

# Chaos

Now without getting too obsessed with this artificial and toy example, I think there are some important lessons about causation here. Here we have a world on complete determinisism - everything that 'happens' does so because of the rules defining the universe. Not only that, but these rules are extremely simple: squares are black or white, they change according to a fixed formula. And yet, from this simple prescription, patterns emerge. The patterns generated by some of the possible rules, for example this Rule 30, can be unpredictable in an interesting [formal sense](http://sjsu.rudyrucker.com/~harry.fu/paper/) - there is no shortcut to working out the state of the the grid world after a certain number of iterations: you just have to run the simulation and see what happens.

Such rules exhibit deterministic chaos - which has entered common speech through the idea of a butterfly flapping its wings and causing a storm the other side of the atlantic. What it really means is that a complex system can display high sensitivity to initial conditions, so that a small change (a single square being black rather than white, say - or a butterfly flapping its wings once rather than twice) can, in time, come to determine whether large scale patterns exist or not (whether there is a large triangle halfway down - or whether a storm forms across the atlantic). To see this viscerally you really need to play with an interactive demostration of the cellular automata, like this one:

http://lucasoman.com/files/projects/caeditor/caed.php

Try this. Put a single black square on the top row and enjoy the patterns. Now go along the top row adding and removing an additional black square, so there are only ever two black squares on the top row. Sometime you can add a black square and there are no large changes in the pattern of triangles you see. Sometime you add a black square and a massive white triangle appears 'from nowhere'. That is a senstivity to initial conditions, your added black square is the butterfly flapping its wings.

The lesson that cellular automata teaches me is that even a simple deterministic system can be unpredictable, in all useful senses of that word. These simple systems generate behaviour due to their internal logic (the rules, the initial state), a behaviour that can't be dissected in any easy way externally - to model it you need to build a complete replica of the system.

Think of the possibilities for our real physical universe - likely to have rules more complex and a vastly more variable state space. Should we really fear sphexishness in such a world? 

As an aside, I know as an academic psychologist how laughably inept our attepts are at predicting human behaviour. Even without direct evidence of our deterministically chaotic nature, I'd still vote that we will remain unpreditable for beyond the foreseeable future.

We may be deterministic machines in a deterministic universe, but we are complex systems which carry an non-reducable nexus of causes with us - in our unique history, and in our unique position in the buzzing-blooming confusion of the environment. Our actions may be compelled, but they are in part compelled by personal causes. Causes which, for convenience, I will call "our selves". 

So when I feel the encroaching fear of determinism, I remind myself that "[That it's you and no one else that owns / That spot that yer standing, that space that you're sitting](http://www.bobdylan.com/us/songs/last-thoughts-woody-guthrie)". 

I may be caused, but those causes are mine uniquely.

But neuroscientists can predict what we'll do from looking at our brains, can't they? [BRAIN](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=@ChoiceEngine%20BRAIN)

How this connects to our beliefs about why we act: [REASONS](https://twitter.com/intent/tweet?text=@ChoiceEngine%20REASONS)